This folio in the Tutinama portrays numerous areas of discoloration and peeled off flakes of paint that show another layer of paint.
John Seyller discusses this in his research and hypothesizes that the Tutinama may have been originally illustrated in the Candayana style decades before it came into the hands of the Mughal artist.
One night, the parrot tells Khojisteh another story to keep her from giving in to her lust for her lover.
The story begins in Kabul, with a rich merchant who has a beautiful daughter named Zehra. All the wealthy men in the city have tried to woo her but Zehra desires someone who is either wise or acquires a skill.
Enter, three young men whom each possessed a valuable art. The first man’s art is the ability to find lost things and see the future.
The second man can make a horse out of wood, such that whoever mounts on top of it, it floats in the air similar to the height of the Throne of Solomon.
The third man is an archer that can pierce at any object he sets his sight on.
They go to Kabul and ask the merchant for Zehra’s hand in marriage.
The merchant happily tells Zehra about the three suitors and she says, “I shall think about it and tell them my decision tomorrow”
But at night Zehra disappears from the house.
Once dawn hits the horizon, everyone searches for Zehra, but she is nowhere to be found. The merchant turns to the three suitors for help and puts their skills to use.
If we look at the top section of the painting, we see that there are two women. The women on the right can be identified as a worker of the house because of the lack of decorative jewelry and simple clothing.
In contrast, the women on the left might be Zehra as she is wearing gold jewellery and is framed by the doorway which is a common technique to emphasize notables.
The women are smirking, maintaining eye contact with one another whilst in conversation.
In the center, we can see a big switch in mood from mingling at the top, to tension and worrisome in the center.
In the right-hand corner, there is a worker standing outside. He is holding a stick, maybe a broom and is looking at the house. It is possible that he may be spying on the merchant or the three suitors OR he is conspiring with the evil fairy that kidnapped Zehra?
Here we see the merchant approaches the three suitors in hopes of finding his daughter.
The Merchant asks the first suitor to inform him where his daughter is.
After an hour, the young man states, “a fairy has carried your daughter to the top of a mountain that is inaccessible to men”
The merchant then asks the second suitor to create a wooden horse for the third suitor so he can use his archery skills to kill the fairy and bring Zehra back.
Notice here, all the characters’ eyes, nose, and mouth are drawn neatly and modelled delicately, whereas the accessories and turbans are not drawn in detail.
The second man follows the merchant's order and creates the horse. Then the archer ascends to the sky all mighty and vanquishes the fairy.
Now in the story, the dilemma is, who gets the hand of the beautiful princess, since all three of the suitors helped to bring Zehra back home?
The simple answer is, the man who killed the fairy, because he exposed himself to the most danger.